---
layout: post
_styles: |
    .container {
    max-width: 950px; 
    }
title: An introduction to RSDFoam
date: 2023-06-01 00:00:00-0000
description: an in-house solver for real gas shock and detonation simulation
tags: OpenFOAM
categories: Solvers
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
thumbnail: assets/img/CFDfoundationLogo.png
toc:
  sidebar: right
---
<!-- the script and style -->
<script>
function togglebibBlock(blockid) {
  var id = document.getElementById(blockid);
  if (id) {
    if(id.className.indexOf('bibBlock') != -1) {
        id.className.indexOf('noshow') == -1?id.className = 'bibBlock noshow':id.className = 'bibBlock';
    }
  } else {
    return;
  }
}
</script>

<style>
div.noshow { display: none; }
div.bibBlock {}
</style> 
<!-- the script and style -->

RSDFoam is a solver for <font color=red>R</font>eal gas <font color=red>S</font>hock and <font color=red>D</font>etonation simulation based on Open<font color=red>FOAM</font>. The present solver was based on <font color=red>the reactive Euler equations</font>. It has considered the nonidealities in the equation of state, thermodynamic functions and mass action law brought about by the interaction between the fluid particles and by their finite volume. 

## Implementation
RSDFoam was a connection between Cantera and blastFoam. A number of real gas models based on cubic equation of state were implemented by the authors in Cantera 2.4. The solver also utilize the the efficient chemistry solver (CVODE) and flexible input formats in Cantera. BlastFoam offers a number of CFD capabilities including high-order flux evaluation, time integration, etc.

<div class="row" >
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/CanteraDiagram.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Inheritance diagram for implementing real gas models in Cantera. Dashed arrow denotes an instance, indicated onto the dashed line, is created in the class pointed at.
</div>

<div class="row" >
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/RSDFoamDiagram.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Inheritance diagram for classes used in the connection between blastFoam and Cantera. Dashed arrow denotes an instance, indicated onto the dashed line, is created in the class pointed at.
</div>

## Validation
RSDFoam has been thoroughly validated against analytical solutions, previous numerical simulation results and experimental data. The satisfactory agreement demonstrates the accuracy and robustness of the solver for real gas based shock and detonation simulation. 

### shock tube problem
<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/Sod_P.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/Sod_rho.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/Sod_T.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Analytical and numerical solutions of Sod shock tube problem at 0.05 s.
</div>


### Oblique shock
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/ObliquePolar.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The oblique shock wave angle and deflection angle relation calculated for IG gas and RK gas.
</div>

### Constant volume reactor
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/CVIDT.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Ignition delay time of stoichiometric (a) H_{2}-air and (b) DME-O2 mixtures calculated with IG and RK EoS. The second row shows the relative differences of IDT obtained with IG and RK EoS.
</div>

### Detonation speed
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/DetSpeed.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Comparison of steady detonation speed calculated with CJ theory and RSDFoam, and measured by Bauer et al [1].
</div>

### Reaction zone structure of steady planar detonation
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/ZND_P.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/ZND_T.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/ZND_massFraction.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Flow structure of detonations obtained with 1D unsteady simulation and the ZND theory. 
</div>


### Pulsating detonation
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/pulsatingDet.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Shock pressure of pulsating detonation. Four mesh sizes were used for the convergence study.
</div>

### 2D Cellular detonation
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/forblogs/RSDFoam/CellularStructure.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Numerical soot foils obtained with (a) IG EoS and (b) NA EoS. 
</div>

## To use the solver
Source codes and demos are available upon reasonable request.

Please cite our papers if you use this solver for your research
<pre>
@article{WengCAF2023,
  title = {Implementation of an {{OpenFOAM}} Solver for Shock and Detonation Simulation at High Pressure},
  author = {Weng, Zifeng and M{\'e}vel, R{\'e}my},
  year = {2023},
  journal = {Computers \& Fluids},
  pages = {106012},
  doi = {10.1016/j.compfluid.2023.106012}
}
</pre>

<a href="javascript:togglebibBlock('ref2')" class="textlink">Previous works using this solver</a>
<div id="ref2" class="bibBlock noshow">
<pre>
[1] Zifeng Weng, Rémy Mével. An OpenFOAM Solver for Shock and Detonation Simulation in Real Gas. The 29th ICDERS. At: Siheung, South Korea (2023).
[2] Zifeng Weng, Rémy Mével. Implementation of an OpenFOAM solver for shock and detonation simulation at high pressure.  Computers & Fluids 265, 106012 (2023).
[3] Zifeng Weng, Rémy Mével. Linear and non-linear stability of gaseous detonation at elevated pressure. Combustion and Flame 262, 113361 (2024).
[4] Zifeng Weng, Rémy Mével. Dynamics of detonation cellular structure in linear and nonlinear instability regimes. (under reviewed)
</pre>
</div>

<a href="javascript:togglebibBlock('ref1')" class="textlink">References</a>
<div id="ref1" class="bibBlock noshow">
<pre>
[1] R.G. Schmitt, and P.B. Butler, “Detonation Properties of Gases at Elevated Initial Pressures,” Combustion Science and Technology 106(1–3), 167–191 (1995).
</pre>
</div>